John Richards

BIO

John is a Distinguished Research Scientist at IBM's Thomas J. Watson
Research Center. He has created award-winning systems in support of
interpersonal communication, ubiquitous computing, and web
accessibility, and is now exploring new practices and tooling to support
the creation and testing of trustworthy AI systems. He received the
Alexander C. Williams Jr. Award from the Human Factors Society in 1984,
was named a Fellow of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) in
1997, elected a member of the IBM Academy of Technology in 2006, named a
Fellow of the British Computer Society in 2011, and received the
Lifetime Practice Award from ACM SIGCHI in 2021.

PERSONAL LIFE

John is married to Vicki Hanson. They were married in 1980. Vicki is
currently the CEO of the Association for Computing Machinery. John and
Vicki have two daughters, Brandin Knowles born in 1983 and Kaelin
Allmendinger born in 1991. Brandin is a Professor at Lancaster
University in the UK and has two sons, Alfie and Harvey. Kaelin has a
successful career in online marketing and lives nearby in Honeoye Falls.
John and Vicki love Shetland Sheepdogs and currently have two, Bella
(born in Scotland), and Shadow (born in Connecticut).

John and Vicki currently live in Honeoye Falls, NY. Before that they
lived in Newport-on-Tay in Scotland where Vicki was a Professor at the
University of Dundee. Before that, they lived in Chappaqua New York
where both John and Vicki worked at IBM's Thomas J. Watson Research
Center. Their first home was in Westport Connecticut.

MUSIC ACTIVITIES

John Spends as much time as possible playing music. He primarily play
instruments with keys and instruments with frets, along with composing
and singing choral music as a tenor and creating virtual choirs.

John is currently the organist and music director at Saint John's
Episcopal Church in Honeoye Falls near Rochester, New York. Before that
he served in these roles at Saint Margaret's Episcopal Church in Dundee,
Scotland.

Instruments John play with keys:

Organ (pipe and tone-wheel) 
Piano and synthesizer Roland V-Accordion
Trumpet and flugelhorn ... sort of "with keys"
Electronic Wind Instrument (EWI)

Instruments John plays with frets:

Guitar (acoustic, electric, and hexaphonic driving Roland V-Guitar and synth) 
Bass guitar 
Fretless bass guitar ... sort of "with frets"
Mandolin and octave mandolin 
Banjo 
Drums (no frets anywhere but hardly worth its own category)

MAJOR SYSTEMS

Some of the major systems John has built:

Audio Distribution System. World's first commercially viable digital
voice mail product. Pioneered the concept of a user interface management
system supporting rapid alteration of function throughout development.
Contributions recognized by Human Factors Society Alexander C. Williams
Jr. Award.

Olympic Message System. Provided voice communications for Olympic
athletes, coaching staff, family, and friends throughout 1984 Summer
Games. Featured a novel message notification system based on an early
object-oriented language from IBM Research. Associated paper on the
behavioral principles of system design -- cover story for Communications
of the ACM -- still a frequent download from ACM Digital Library.

NetVista. Integrated suite of autonomic servers and multi-platform
clients (including IBM's first offering for the Apple Mac) developed
entirely in a pure object system. Product enabled primary and secondary
schools to easily and safely access the Internet through shared
low-bandwidth connections.

SmartPad. IBM's first mobile e-business application. Pioneered the
concept of retail shopping via a mobile device, demonstrating how novice
users could effectively access terascale relational databases. Featured
in two consecutive IBM Annual Reports.

accessibilityWorks. Multi award winning browser enhancement allowing
people with visual, motor, and cognitive disabilities to use the World
Wide Web. Now a key open source component in emerging Global Public
Inclusive Infrastructure.

researcher.ibm.com. Novel content creation, management, and
concept-based search system that automatically creates rich
interconnections between people, projects, publications, and
professional interests. Provides the external Web face for the worldwide
IBM Research population (thousands of researchers, tens of thousands of
publications). If you're reading this, you're reading it on this system.

HPC Petascale Productivity. Funded by DARPA's High Productivity
Computing Systems initiative, developed a rigorous empirical and
model-based approach to human productivity assessment. Basis for the
successful demonstration of 10x productivity gains in parallel
scientific programming and system administration for users of IBM's
POWER7 IH petascale cluster.

AI Fairness 360. Extensible open source toolkit to help developers
examine, report, and mitigate discrimination and bias in machine
learning models throughout the AI application lifecycle.

AI Explainability 360. Extensible open source toolkit to help developers
comprehend how machine learning models predict labels by various means
throughout the AI application lifecycle.
